If this were 2021, and we're at City
Lab, the only thing people want to talk
to me about is how am I going to reduce
gun violence in Baltimore? Now, the only
thing people want to talk to me about
how did I reduce gun violence in
Baltimore. And I think
it's not just that we did it, it's how
we did it. Folks are
very because listen, we're talking about
a place that when I was growing up, we
had breathing while black policing,
right? Seven times in my lifetime I was
sat down on the curb and put in the
handcuffs including in the rain simply
because I was outside and looked the way
I look, accused of committing crimes
that I couldn't have possibly committed
cuz I was 2 hours away at college when
it happened. So, when you think about
that and think about that I'm 42 now,
but 18 out of the 42 years that I've
been alive, Baltimore had over 300
murders. And we went from in the last 6
years, right? Violence has dropped over
almost 60% in the city of Baltimore.
Going from 300 plus to now 133, which is
still 133 too many for me, but the fact
that we've been able to do that and that
we've done it in a smart way is is
important for us.
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. [music] I'm Tracy
Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> So Joe, we are here in Madrid as part of
Bloomberg City Lab.
>> Tough tough assignment.
>> I know. A real hardship posting.
>> Yeah, a real hardship posting, but
willing to do it.
>> Yeah. So, there are mayors from all over
the world here all talking about the
challenges and opportunities facing
cities. We're about to speak to one of
them in particular and it's actually a
really interesting test case of I think
a lot of themes that kind of touch on
the the Odd Lots ooh, let's say.
>> Well, one of the things that comes up
all the time obviously on Odd over the
years is housing, right? And one of the
things that we've discovered, I would
say, is okay, every It's easy to say
housing is a stress everywhere, housing
is a challenge, there's a housing
crisis, and so forth. And it's kind of
true, but as we've discovered, it like
there's a different fingerprint of it
everywhere, right? So,
you know, we go to we were in, you know,
Mount Airy, North Carolina, and there's
hardly any It's very sparse and rural.
Even there, there's a housing shortage,
etc. Everywhere there are these common
themes, but every location has its own
distinct challenges.
>> Right. So, the city we're going to be
talking about today is Baltimore. And in
Baltimore, one of the issues with
housing is this vacant housing problem.
And I got to say, I actually feel really
bad about this. Um my dad was a pilot,
as you know, and he flew out of BWI for
many, many years.
>> Uh-huh.
>> But he lives in Annapolis, so I never
actually spent that much time in
Baltimore, except to get the Greyhound
bus and go to the Baltimore bus
terminal. And I would not want to judge
any city based on the Greyhound
terminal, but I definitely saw a lot of
vacant houses around the area.
>> Yeah. I haven't spent a ton of time in
Baltimore, either. You know, I was born
in Detroit. I have a lot of family
there. Also a city that sort of famously
for a long time had a lot of vacant
houses. You know, there were times when,
you know, you see these websites
advertising houses for a dollar, etc.
It's like there's clearly so much
potential in a place with such, you
know, at least nominally
uh affordable homes. So, like, how do
you actually get people to move in? How
do you make them valuable? How do you
fix them up? So many, I guess,
interesting technical questions, I would
say, to solving these problems.
>> Exactly. So, we do, in fact, have the
perfect guest. We're going to be
speaking with Mayor Brandon Scott, who
is, of course, the mayor of Baltimore.
So, Mayor Scott, thank you so much for
coming on Odd Lots.
>> Thank you all for having me. Great to be
here.
>> So, we're
>> In Madrid, no less.
>> In Madrid, I know.
>> in the world, I take it.
>> Second best city in the world, I take
it.
>> Second greatest,
outside of Baltimore.
>> That's right.
>> So, when you became mayor of Baltimore,
I'm really curious how did the vacant
housing problem actually show up on your
radar and why did it become a priority
for you?
>> Well, for me, it should have been on my
radar the day I was born, right? So, I
was born and raised in Baltimore. Born
in 1984, so I had the the the fortune or
misfortune of growing up in the '80s,
'90s, and 2000. When you think about all
of the crazy things that happened in the
United States at that time, of course
we're talking about drugs showing up
into neighborhoods, the war on drugs,
failed war on drugs, and zero tolerance
policing. But, I also
live in the city that is the birthplace
of racial redlining. It was signed at
the very desk that I sit in. The first
racial redlining law was signed in
Baltimore City. I grew up on a block
with a vacant house that my dad made me
and my brothers cut the grass at every
single time because he said by the time
the city gets around to cutting it for
the owner, it's going to be a foot high,
right? So, for me, this wasn't something
that I discovered when I became the
mayor of Baltimore. It had been very
prominent in my neighborhood that I grew
up in in Park Heights and all over the
city of Baltimore for a long time. Uh
but, I knew it had to be a priority
because you cannot and we will not be
the best version of Baltimore if we are
not a whole version of Baltimore. And
when you think about it like this,
uh when I was a junior in high school in
the year 2000, uh
December of 2000, Baltimore had 16,000
vacant properties.
And that's a lot less than the 30 or
40,000 it had years prior to that. But,
when I became mayor on December 8th of
2020, Baltimore had 16,000 vacant
properties. The number essentially had
not moved. So, we knew that we needed a
a different strategy to dealing with
this long-standing challenge. That is,
you can directly I I showed this at City
Lab for Matt. I'm a I'm a map and a data
guy, right? When you look at
>> Love it.
>> the the 1937
racial redlining map in Baltimore, and
then you look at the vacancy map in
2020, or even the vacancy map today,
it's the same neighborhoods. Literally
the same neighborhoods. In Baltimore we
they they call it the the black
butterfly and the white L. So, you got
this white L that goes down the city and
out, and then you have these two uh
heartbeats, so to speak, of the black
butterfly, the wings. And you can see uh
that the vacancies in Baltimore are a
direct correlation to that, direct
correlation to purposeful disinvestment
into those neighborhoods, and all the
other things, deindustrialization, all
of those things that happened.
>> How would you describe Okay, everyone
can recognize that having lots of vacant
housing is a very serious problem for a
city. You could recognize it from, as
you said, the moment you were born,
growing up. What was the pre prior to
your administration, what was the sort
of status quo thinking about it? What
was the way that prior administrations
had thought about the challenge or the
problem?
>> Well, listen, I I I have to say that my
predecessors, with the with the tools
and knowledge and understanding that
they had, they didn't do a bad job,
right? The the only thing that I'd say
that they uh did that I do differently
in thinking about it differently is that
for and this is just this is mayors,
this is politicians, right? Folks like
to tell folks that I'm going to handle
this issue in my time in office. There's
no way in holy hell that any mayor was
going to eliminate uh vacant housing in
Baltimore in four years, let alone
eight. And a lot Some of them many of
them before me got a lot less than even
four years, right? So, when you think
about that, the approach for us it has
never been about the approach.
Baltimore, uh between our city
government partnership with with state
government, with our private community,
with the with the folks in philanthropic
and CDCs and developers, they've always
had the strategy. They also had the the
the know-how and the do-how of taking
vacant and even demolishing them,
turning them to park space, getting them
renovated, building a lot of housing,
all of those things. It's been about the
capital. That's what they did not have.
They didn't have the capital and they
did not have a a unified strategy that
that was about uh
something greater than one mayoral term.
And I think that's where we have struck
struck gold, so to speak, is that we
came out and I stood with uh the
community in BUILD, which is a a a
community organization that has
relationships with churches and
communities and mosque and everything
all over the city of Baltimore and
represents a lot of residents and
neighborhood leaders uh and our business
community in the greater Baltimore
community and myself stood up and said,
"We
are are coming up with this strategy
that we, as in Baltimore as a community,
not just city government, not just
private, not just philanthropic, not
just the residents, we are going to end
this crisis for good over the next 15
years. And this strategy is our
strategy, so that everyone is bought
in." That's the difference. And now that
we're all working together and then we
got a blessing a few months later. We
got a a
governor elected and now the governor of
Maryland is also a member of that,
right? The state government is giving us
$50 million a year. So, now we've been
able to uh just think about that. I told
you it was 16,000 for 20 [clears throat]
years, right? So, we went from 16,000
when I took office now down to 11,806
as of uh early early this morning.
>> Do you get a daily report on that? You
have it down to the down to the number
>> There's a dashboard, there's a website
you can go look. It's Reframe Baltimore
will tell you how many, right? And the
number sometimes fluctuates because we
take some off, some go up, but it is
that collective way that we've done it.
Because it's a it's a very
very tough issue for even people to
understand. You mentioned like dollar
houses. People are like, "Well, if you
sell all the vacant for a dollar,
they'll go away." No.
>> Yeah.
>> Because one, the overwhelming majority
of the vacant in the city of Baltimore
are not owned by the city of Baltimore.
They're owned by private folks who are
sitting on them or folks that we have to
track down. And many, I hate to say
this, a good bit of them were ones that
back in the day one of my predecessors
sold for a dollar. But if I sell you a
house for a dollar and you don't have
the 100, 150,000 dollars needed to
actually get it up to living standards,
it's still going to remain vacant.
>> Well, so on this note, I want to back up
for a second and ask what is potentially
a very basic question, but how do the
houses actually become vacant? Like what
is the typical process by which a house
becomes vacant? We've heard the
population decline story in Baltimore,
but like it's hard for me to believe
people just leave and don't do anything
with their houses.
>> So it's it's a couple of things. One,
the thing I can tell you about Baltimore
that is probably so much different than
any other city is that
we're a city of neighborhoods, right?
And I literally tell people this that
those neighborhoods can literally be a
city of countries. Not two blocks are
the same, right? You everything is
different. That's why our strategy is
block by block. But just to give you the
historical context, we know that we got
a lot of a lot of vacant when suburbs
were built, right? Like we had suburbs
being built, white flight, all of those
things happened. That happened in cities
around the country. So we had that. Then
we had deindustrialization. We had
Bethlehem Steel and General Motors.
General Motors is actually the reason
why I am here because my mom's parents
moved to Baltimore. My granddad, when
they were down to their last $100, was
thinking about moving back to rural
Virginia, got a job at General Motors,
and boom. They bought the house where my
mom grew up in, and my dad, who was
following my my uncles, his older
brothers and older cousins to Baltimore,
visiting in the summertime. My uncles
were working at Bethlehem Steel. Him and
my mom met, and the rest is history.
But, uh those went away. Those jobs went
away, right? And then some people did
leave. And then when you you add onto
that that a lot of folks uh that left
left those houses, and they left their
houses, and people die, right? Older
folks die. They they left them to people
who didn't care for them. You had a lot
of folks coming and buy up property that
were vacant when people did move out,
and just sitting on them.
>> Or they're just waiting for prices to
recover.
>> waiting or waiting for the city or
someone to come along and give them more
than what they paid for, right? But,
then you have We have a lot of folks who
pass away, and their kids are gone, and
they don't want the property. It's It
runs the gamut. There is not one sole
reason why you have so many. But, when
you think about we were a city of
basically a million people, and now
we're a city of 600,000, right? You
think about the amount of people that
lost that left the city of Baltimore for
multitude of reasons. And then when you
add on to that
redlining, deindustrialization,
you know, crime and violence and drugs
that just showed up out of nowhere all
of a sudden. You add all of those things
together, you have really a recipe for
for disaster, so to speak.
>> You said something that, you know, it
must be a tricky issue because, okay,
let's say, and I want to talk more about
this, but you get this infusion of
capital, or you get this coordination of
capital, and suddenly, um
the governor is willing to work with you
and allocate money from the budget. But,
presumably, yeah, you I imagine you
don't want You You private capital, but
you don't want entities who are just
going to take the public money to see
their properties
inflate. So, how do you think about
coordinating that so that you get that
private capital, you get the investment
capital, but it's not just essentially a
free lunch of Okay, we're going to do
>> We're going to do whatever you want.
Right, yeah, yeah. So, that's where the
>> How do you get that skin in the game?
>> That's where the block-by-block comes
in, really. So, we do block-level
planning for these, but it's also about
strategic. We have strategic investment
zones, seven of them where most of the
vacant are, and we What we're telling
folks is is that we have a plan for each
block. And it's we we don't just do big
developers. We work with small
developers. We work with community
development corporations. And the great
thing about uh the city of Baltimore
versus Detroit, where folks are like,
"Oh, you guys should create a land bank
like Detroit." Well, we visited Detroit
and they were like, "Well, you guys
don't need to do that because your
housing your housing department has the
authorities that our that our land bank
have now." We didn't have that within
the city of government. And now, what
we've been able to do uh because also,
it's not that easy to get get to the
point of getting a vacant back to
renovation. So, I'll I'll step back and
walk you guys how
how this work. You own a house, sorry.
You own a house that's vacant. And uh
Joe, and then we our housing department
our inspectors come out, someone
complains there's a vacant house to me,
the owner's not taking care of it. We
give them a
citation. They have 30 days to remedy
that citation. We literally, legally
can't do anything for that time frame.
Then, we come back again, and we have to
do it. Now, after that one, then we
maybe cut the grass, lane it, etc. We
have raised the fines up. We can fine
them up to $1,000. Then, they get a
vacant building notice, right? And if we
want to take that property through
receivership and all these other things
uh in rem, we have to go to court.
>> Mhm.
>> And that and that they know how long
that takes. That could take, you know,
uh
it used to take two to three years,
right? Now we've worked with the court,
we have a special in rem docket, right?
And we're getting that that time down a
lot faster. But we're doing that
thousands of times, right? Over and over
again. And when you're talking about
that takes the time to assemble blocks,
right? Now think about this block, 4800
block of Park Heights Avenue, right?
Till the Park Heights master plan. It's
the neighborhood I grew up in. It's one
of the largest redevelopment initiatives
in the country.
Think about it like this. They started
talking about the plan when I was in
middle school, right? The city finally
was able to have all of the properties
acquired when I was a staffer in city
government and on the board of their CDC
in 2008 and 2009. We finally had them
all demolished around
11 or 12.
The first new housing units didn't get
built until I was mayor, right? That's
when you talk about those large amounts
of vacant properties. It just takes a
long time when it's a long a lot of
them. The single ones you can re-
replenish them a little quicker. And it
takes a lot of block by block level
planning. Identify in a developer,
making sure the developer fits with the
neighborhood, making sure that we have
the partnership with the state because
they also have have have have their
their sway and control over the money
that they're pumping into. Everyone has
to be aligned and making sure that we
are not just giving it to people who
just want to make a buck, but they
understand that yes, we want them to
make money, we believe in capitalism,
but we have they have to understand how
this is going to work to improve those
neighborhoods. And we've seen so many
neighborhoods take great great great
change like Johnson Square in East
Baltimore, Oliver in East Baltimore
where, you know, they used to film The
Wire. And now they're selling houses
over there like for
$1,000.
>> How long until we reference The Wire?
Yeah.
>> Um it had to happen. So, same with
>> Unless it occurs that magic for us.
>> Mainly occurs for us, but yes, mainly
occurs for us. We don't like the show at
all.
>> Oh, really? Wait, did we just change the
entire subject?
>> Let's just talk about The Wire.
>> You go off on The Wire for a while.
>> I guess it's it's for us it's it's we
understand it and we appreciate it for
the storytelling, but
people don't look at NYPD Blue and think
like, "Oh, this is all New Yorkers."
>> Right. I see what you're saying.
>> That's what I'm saying, right? And for
us, we've only had those shows, right?
So, we had The Wire, we had The Corner,
we had Homicide: Life on the Street.
Now, when they maybe do a
complete Baltimore story where on a show
HBO, hint hint, like neighborhood
>> New York we have Seinfeld and Friends
and all these other versions.
>> that. We only have We only have the bad.
And you know, people just like, "Oh,
yeah, I saw this show. This is what the
whole city is."
>> All right, fair enough. Um I was going
to ask, so when you're How do you decide
what to do with the vacant houses that
you end up, you know, taking back and
taking control of? So, you can work with
private developers, as you mentioned. Um
you I guess they can choose to renovate
them, they can choose to demolish them.
Like, how do those conversations
actually go?
>> demolish or renovate is made by us
beforehand.
>> Okay.
>> If the houses are going to be
demolished, we do that. Uh we do that in
partnership with the with the state. Uh
we, you know, the renovation will when
we award an RFP to someone, we're
awarding it for housing, like to
renovate, to do that. So, that's we do
that, but that again goes back to the
block level planning, right? And making
sure that we like, "Okay, in this in
this neighborhood, we need this, right?
And this these this block is these
houses are too far gone. We're just
going to knock that down, make it park
space, or RFP the land, right? These
This block This small developer can
handle This block only has three vacant
and it's a block of 10. They can handle
just doing these particular one, or we
have scattered sites. So, we do that
identification through our
block-by-block strategies, through our
neighborhood strategic investment areas,
identifying those things before we give
get over to the developers or the CDC or
individuals because we're also One of
the most innovative things that we're
doing. Uh folks typically use uh TIF tax
increment financing for like new
developments, right? Think For us, think
about like Harbor East or Harbor Point,
all the fancy areas. Well, we're
actually doing it on TIF. And this is
the first time
>> You got a What is it? TIF This is where
I cut in and say, "Okay, well, explain
how TIF works."
>> Tax increment financing, where
essentially like that you would put all
this money up front and you would get it
back on the back end. Uh which is they
used to incentivize development all
around the country. This is the first
time that that that that tool is being
used for something that's not a
non-contiguous area. So, what we're
doing is we're using the VBN, the vacant
building notice, all across the city and
identifying like we're going to put a
TIF on that. So, we offered out and
people were going crazy. Like, "It's not
going to work. No one's going to apply
for this. You have to have it in one
area. That's the way the TIF works."
Well, we put out in our first round $28
million worth of TIF financing. We got
$380 million worth of applications. So,
the demand is there. And this is
affordable housing TIF in neighborhoods.
And you can see if you look at our map,
right? You can see that it's going right
in those redline neighborhoods, right in
those disinvested neighborhoods. And in
fact, as a part of my state of the city,
we we unveiled an investments map data
map, where you can see since I've been
in office where the investment has gone,
right? And we did a heat map. And
Baltimore is purple, so the darker the
the more purple, the more investment.
And you can see that we are
strategically investing in the
neighborhoods that have been disinvested
in in the butterfly or the redline
neighborhoods. And that's how we're
going to build upon what we're doing.
>> Wait, why do people think that TIF only
works for contiguous areas?
>> I guess because no one tried it before.
I had no idea. But but it's probably
also a little bit of of of of hidden
racism in people that were saying that.
They were also saying like, "You can't
do TIF in the area that that is this
kind of
area, right?" But yeah, they were wrong.
We knew they were wrong. It It
the numbers speak for themselves.
>> How much do you think about like the
specific types of house Let's say you
raise a
tract of land or whatever and you think,
"Okay, reimagining what this space can
be." How much are you planning the
specific type of housing that you want
in in an area, whether it's multi-family
rental, condos, free-standing
solo home? Like, how do you think about
like envisioning what the neighborhood
should or could be?
>> Again, I'm going to go back to the
neighborhood block level planning. So,
this is this is Baltimore, right? So,
those neighborhoods love their
neighborhood aesthetic and they want to
keep them as much as possible, right?
So, even for example, in that block of
Park Heights that I talked about where
we knocked down which were we have row
homes, connected row homes for the most
part in Baltimore. We have single
family, too. I live in one. But uh
connected row homes, even though we
built a a multi-unit senior apartment
building for senior living there, it
actually looks on the outside like the
row homes that were there before. Uh so,
we have to make sure that we're meeting
the aesthetic of the neighborhood and
what the neighborhood actually needs.
So, that neighborhood needed that,
right? It needed places for
our older adults to actually who want to
remain in the community to do that. The
next phase that we're doing that that
we'll break ground on before the year's
out, hopefully, is the first
homeownership opportunities built there
since my grandmother and grandfather
moved to the neighborhood, right? So,
that's the way that we're doing it, and
it just depends on where you are,
because we want to mix it. For example,
we had a
housing project, Perkins Somerset, in
Old Town. Now, we have the new one where
we have the mixture, right? We have
mixed income. We have to make sure that
we're providing a multitude of
opportunities, cuz it's not it can't
just be all high-end, can't just be all
affordable. We need working class, all
of those things.
>> So, one of the other things you're doing
is taxing vacant land. And we've done,
you know, we our vacant houses, I should
say. We've done episodes on all lots
about a land tax.
Walk us through like the the pushback
that you got to that plan. Why do people
seem opposed to taxing empty buildings
or empty land?
>> Well, we actually didn't get any public
pushback, right? The reality was is that
the way Maryland is
set up, we had to get the state to say
yes, you can tax them at a at a higher
rate. Now, it took a little while for
them to do that, but now, we got the
blessing, we got the bill passed, and
now we're able to do that at the local
level.
Uh and I think that it's just that
uh there's been this this
theme, right? So, we're independent
city. There's no county government for
us. Amen. Hallelujah. Uh it's just us
and state and the federal government.
But, there's been this sentiment that
like the city doesn't know what it's
doing, etc., etc. But, you can't really
argue with the data, right? Whether it's
on, you know, we've reduced basically
eliminated one in four vacant houses in
my time in office, right? We've reduced
violence in the city to the lowest
levels on recorded record. You can't
really argue with the numbers. So, now
folks are more they're more uh uh ready
to give us more of that authority to
deal with the issues, because it's also
a drain on them, right? And that's the
what what we're saying to them is that
this takes money out of the state's
pocket, right? The the inability for us
to do stuff with these owners hurts the
state of Maryland just as much as it
hurts the city of Baltimore.
>> I was just about to ask you you you
mentioned the big drop in violence. How
much is that a key pillar of any sort of
development success? Cuz ultimately I
imagine you can have the right tax
incentives and the right codes and the
right planning, but people don't want to
live around a lot of crime. How much has
that decline been a sort of I guess a
tailwind to the entire project?
>> that that it is the number one reason
why Baltimore is so hot right now.
Because after all those years, I'll just
say it like this. If this were 2021 and
we're at City Lab, the only thing people
want to talk to me about is how am I
going to reduce [clears throat]
>> Yeah.
>> gun violence in Baltimore. Now, the only
thing people want to talk to me about
how did I reduce gun violence in
Baltimore. And I think
it's not just that we did it, it's how
we did it. Folks are
very because listen, we're talking about
a place that when I was growing up, we
had breathing while black policing,
right? Seven times in my lifetime I was
sat down on the curb and put in the
handcuffs including in the rain simply
because I was outside and looked the way
I look. Accused of committing crimes
that I couldn't have possibly committed
cuz I was two hours away at college when
it happened. So, when you think about
that and think about that I'm 42 now,
but 18 out of the 42 years that I've
been alive, a Baltimore had over 300
murders. And we went from in the last
six years, right? Violence has dropped
over almost 60% in the city of
Baltimore. Going from 300 plus to now
133, which is still 133 too many for me,
but the fact that we've been able to do
that and that we've done it in a smart
way is is important for us.
>> Yeah, so if it's not the sort of
hyper-aggressive
police work, the type of you the type
you described how what has it been? How
would you describe it?
>> Well, let me just start to say that
doesn't work, right? So, if you think
about those years of of zero tolerance.
So, I'll give you as a year for example,
2004,
uh the city had 278 homicides, right?
They arrested 91,000 people in a city of
600,000.
>> Oh my god.
>> Last year we had 133. We arrested 17,000
people.
>> Mhm.
>> Significantly less homicides with
significantly less arrests because it's
never been about how many people you
arrest. It's always been about who and
for what. And the way that we've done it
is we uh by law, a law that I passed as
a city council president in 2019, uh the
mayor of Baltimore has to present a
comprehensive violence prevention plan
at least every 2 years. And that uh is
the what we did. In 2021, I unveiled our
first comprehensive violence prevention
plan. I said that we would reduce
homicides in the city by 15% from 1 year
to the next and people literally laughed
because they laughed because one, they
thought that was ridiculous, and two,
they said it's not going to work the way
you say because we're going to be
[snorts] smart on crime, right? Being
smart on crime is how you really get
tough on it.
>> Yeah.
>> We're going to throw away the idea that
you just go out and arrest everybody for
everything and crime will go down
because it didn't. But, what we've been
able to do is one, we use our focused
deterrence model, what we call GVR S,
the group violence reduction strategy,
which we actually use data, which is
something also funded funded partially
by the folks good folks at Bloomberg, to
identify who are the most likely to be
the victim or perpetrator of gun
violence. And we actually go to them,
many of them, and say they get a letter
directly from me that says, "I know who
you are. I know what you do. This is
your one chance to change your life. We
will help you in any way that we can. If
you need housing, job training,
education, if you want to be relocated,
we'll do that. But if you don't stop
doing what you're doing, I am going to
bring the hammer down on you and we're
going to remove you. Out of the folks
who have taken us up on on that, over
90% of them have not been re-victimized
or recidivated. When you think about
that, and then at the same time, we put
$50 into our community violence
intervention ecosystem, where we're paid
people who used to be involved in their
life to prevent conflict, to go out
there through safe streets, and We Our
Us, and these other organizations to do
that great work, because there are
things that our police officers could
never get in between, because no one's
going to tell them that, right? But at
the same time, we also focus on the flow
of guns. We're going after gun stores,
gun We won the largest settlement
against the gun store in this country's
history. We
won the settlement against the ghost gun
company. We're going after gun
traffickers. We're doing all of that,
and investing into youth and education
in historic ways. That's the way that
we've been able to do it.
>> There's a Professor John Jay College,
Peter Moskos, who Do you know who that
is?
>> who he is.
>> Yeah, he wrote this He spent a few years
within the Baltimore Police Department,
and he wrote a great book about
basically the terrible incentives that
happen when you start incentivizing just
like pure number of arrests.
>> Right.
>> Yes.
>> And why that completely fails as a crime
prevention. I can't remember the name of
the book right now, but it's really
enlightening and again, he makes it very
clear why if the incentive is to just
maximize the number of arrests or
whatever, that will never work in terms
of prevention.
>> Who would have thought that incentives
matter? Crazy, crazy stuff.
>> Building that is actually
documented on a PBS documentary called
The Body Politic. So, my entire first 2
and 1/2 years in office building that is
something people can see.
>> Can I ask how How does safety play into
actually attracting capital back into
the city? cuz I get that, you know, if
you're a business or developer and
you're thinking of putting money into
Baltimore,
you want to see the crime rate go down.
But like, do you people get really
specific about it? Do they have like
targets like, "Okay, once homicides are
under like 100 per year, we'll go in."
>> So, yes and no, right? I I will tell you
that for example, if we were at the
In-N-Out Shopping Center's conference in
Vegas every May a few years ago, let's
say '21 and '22, folks would be saying
to Mr. Mayor, "I love Baltimore, but
until you guys, you know, reduce
homicides and shootings, we can't invest
there." But then you would get folks
that would say like, "Until you guys get
under 300 homicides, right?" It's they
don't depends on the person. But you
know, it was the
the big elephant in the room. Do you
guys have a plan? What's your plan? Is
the plan working? How are you going to
do it? A lot of folks would some folks
would still invest if you show them the
plan even before we actually were able
to implement the plan. Uh but it it was
the big elephant in the room and we've
been able to really show people that we
have it and now folks are like, "Oh, you
guys are right. We're ready to come."
Right? And now we have to continue that.
And I tell the team all the time, folks,
whenever we're at a big event like the
other day I was speaking uh and people
started clapping when we when I
mentioned the 133 number. I said, "Don't
clap. We haven't done anything yet.
That's 133 too many and I don't want my
team to feel like it's time to
celebrate." I said, "This is not
celebratory. We're acknowledging this
historic progress because now that we
know that we can do better,
the best is out there for us to go and
achieve."
>> Let's talk about, you know, cuz this is
Odd Lots Finance podcast. Let's talk a
little bit more about the capital
structure and how that works. You
mentioned, "Okay, like money from the
state." But what are some of these
financing vehicles? How are they
structured? Whose balance sheets do they
sit on? What is the city fronting? How's
that
>> Yeah. So, the fit
>> The city is fronting a TIF money,
obviously. The city The city money is
the TIF money for us. The state is
fronting their their $50 million
investment each and each and every year.
And then we have the private investment,
and we have philanthropic investment
into the vacant strategy. So, it's
really everybody
coalescing together. And then obviously,
the operational portions of it is on on
on the city as well for the most part.
The state has some of the operational
portions of it. But when you think about
the housing department, all of those
things are on the on the city on the
city's books. And even some of the cap
the capital investment in our own
capital budget is also on the city the
city's books as well.
>> Do you get pushback from people in the
community who worry that, "Okay, it's
great. Housing is going to be built,
it's going to be higher quality, etc.
But oh, it's only going to go to wealthy
people." And how do you think about
balancing the need for sheer volume
versus
um you know, guaranteeing that some of
it is affordable or cheaper the below
market rate, whatever it is?
>> That's a very important thing to me,
right? I love the city of DC. My brother
lives there. But I know that
>> [clears throat]
>> if you talk to specifically to
uh old-time black Washingtonians, they
will say that we're no longer chocolate
city, we're latte city, right? Like they
they feel like they've lost a bit of
their culture with a lot of folks coming
in from all over and feeling some of the
original Washingtonians have just been
pushed out, right? And we we very
intentional about understanding that we
do want people to come from all over.
But we also and we have this very unique
opportunity with all the vacant to make
sure that the folks that have stayed in
Baltimore and lived through all of this
can benefit from it from as well. And we
do that uh through things like my buy
back the block program, where we're
taking people who are renters, in fact
paying more in rent than they would in
mortgage, and making them homeowners.
And this is
>> Very familiar in New York City problem
as well.
>> Yeah. And it's also why we we uh work
with different kind of developers,
right? Who smaller developers who were
taking these other things and we can
partner them with folks to get these
people there. We have to be thinking
about all of that because people are
going to say that anytime you make that
investment.
>> So, I have a very technical question
going back to the vacant homes issue,
but one of the things I saw on the
the Baltimore subreddit was someone was
saying like we would get more buyers of
vacant homes or more action on vacant
homes if the water bills were not such
an issue.
>> Yeah.
>> So, what's the deal with the water
bills?
>> So, I think that what I would say is
that I would thought it would be a real
technical question. So,
>> [laughter]
>> I think that what a few things, right?
Yes, water rates have increased. They're
increasing everywhere, but I would say
that our increases up until last year
were the lowest that we've had pretty
much in my in my lifetime, but I would
no developer has said to me that like
oh, I'm not going to come and renovate
houses in Baltimore because of the water
bill. We know that costs are rising
across the board and we're going through
a process now even and where this
conversation really normally leads to is
like oh, well, the county pays less for
their water than we do and they don't
have to pay all these fees and then you
have to spend this long
explanation saying well, they actually
do pay those fees except for the county
just hides the fees in other bills that
they don't see, right? And we're working
with our county partners through a bill
that me and the county executive put in
the state about how the water system is
going to look moving forward because the
city does the water for the surrounding
county as well.
>> All right.
>> We pay every month, they pay every four
months, all of these kind of things
convolute the issue, but water rates and
listen, the thing [clears throat] about
water utilities is that no
taxpayer dollars for the for like
property taxes and other money doesn't
go into that. Water utility systems only
come from the systems themselves. And
when you think about the world and the
craziness that we're living in today and
the cost of of the the equipment and the
materials that needed to make sure that
water that's going up. So,
there's no other way essentially to deal
with it. But, I think that for us it's
really about setting the structure in a
more simplified understandable way for
the residents and making sure that our
partners around are playing a more
critical role uh when it comes to the
resources and that's what we're that's
what we're going to do.
>> Mhm.
>> So, we're here at the CityLab conference
and I'm sure you know every different
city all around the world for the most
part different issues, different
challenges that they're facing. But, a
common theme in much of the world is
what you said at the beginning
deindustrialization. And this is all
across the United States, all across
Europe, etc. A major source of anxiety
at the city, state, national level, you
name it. How do you think of I don't
maybe this is just a very conceptual
question, but okay, presuming that
there's not going to be a big revival of
steel mills in the vicinity of Baltimore
anytime soon, how do you think about the
businesses of the future and what the
the new industries that could thrive in
a city like Baltimore and any other
cities that is that have suffered the
same
>> Oh, no, just in Baltimore, but
>> [laughter]
>> I I think for us listen, we're blessed.
We still have some industry. We's always
going to be a port city. The world found
that out a few years ago when the Key
Bridge collapsed and found out how
important the Port of Baltimore is to
the world, right?
>> Oh, I thought we were going to talk
about The Wire again.
>> The Key Bridge. How's that going? It's
It's going. It's going.
>> It's going. The The bridge has been
demolished and it's moving
pretty fast for a infrastructure project
of that size. People are like, "Oh, the
bridge is not being rebuilt." I'm like,
"This is a bridge, you guys. This
doesn't happen that quickly." Uh but,
we're still a port city. Uh we're
obviously a big uh a big a hub for
tourism and and culture and sports.
We're also ads and meds city, right?
With Hopkins and University of Maryland.
We're a big arts and culture city and
we're a growing tech city, which is
where we think the growth is for us. We
had like 600 million in
in a capital investment into those kind
of firms over the last few years and we
want to continue to see that grow
because they're growing out of Hopkins.
They're growing out of UMD. And we want
to make sure that they stay in the city
because the port's always going to be
there, right? The hospitals are always
going to be there. Tourism is always
going to be there and we're revitalizing
now through the process of revitalizing
the inner harbor as well. But we think
that that and light manufacturing will
continue to be a growth area for us.
>> Well, say more about the competitive
advantage for Baltimore when it comes to
attracting tech businesses and AI in
particular because it feels like at the
moment every city in the US certainly is
kind of trying to do the same thing,
right?
>> Yeah, I think for us one
you get to be that close to you're
29-minute train ride away from DC and
you don't have to pay DC prices, right?
Like that's we're just going to keep and
when you think about especially for
defense and other tech companies, Fort
Meade is there, you know, all of these
things are NSA, all these things are
really close to the city of Baltimore
and you're in a in a perfect spot. You
can get to DC on train in 30 minutes,
you can get to Philly by train in 45,
you can get to New York in 2 hours and
30 minutes and you're in this and we're
the location of Baltimore physically is
an advantage over basically, in my
opinion, any other city in in the
country. But when you add on the
infrastructure of the universities, like
you just not going to get a Johns
Hopkins and the University of Maryland
in the same place in the same city
anywhere else. You're just not going to
get that kind of and the opportunities
that that that Baltimore provides to
folks.
>> I guess you're really close to the data
centers in Virginia as well,
technically, right?
>> Technically, yeah. We're close to them.
>> Huh.
>> Again, like I said in the beginning,
there's a different version of the
housing crisis, the housing problem
everywhere. In New York, a lot of it a
lot of the discourse is just about
zoning rules. Are people finding it it
takes too long to get a permit, etc.
What is the Baltimore version of that
story in terms of
>> Listen, everywhere you go, you're going
to hear the same thing. Whether it's me
and me and Mondami talking about it or
me and Van Johnson from Savannah, we all
talk about making sure that our systems
are working better, right? We we're
going through that now. When I took
office,
they were still doing time sheets by
hand in city government.
>> Wow.
>> Right? So, modern Think Think about
that, right? Now that like we can
modernize those systems and we're
modernizing our permanent systems.
Different agencies had systems that
didn't talk to each other.
>> that like in terms of okay, someone
submits an application or someone
submits an application to make a change
to a building or something like that?
Are there times that you track that you
could say okay, this has substantively
gotten shorter or faster?
>> There Some things have gotten shorter.
And now we got to a point where a lot of
our stuff is waiting for the the
applicant, right? But it was about
simple stuff, right? Well, there wasn't
the applicant put something in, we put
it back, the system didn't auto
automatically notify the applicant that
they were made it waiting on them,
right? Those kind of simple things when
you talking about operating a city
government are important to have from a
systemic point of infrastructure point
of view, making sure that those things
are there. Making sure that you have the
staffing necessary to go through all of
the things that are necessary. And
that's where we've been really focusing
building building that infrastructure up
both from the data side and the
technical side, but from the human
capital as well cuz you need both of
them.
>> Do you have a favorite KPI when it comes
to like local government efficiency?
Like a number that you watch to try to
judge the progress you're making?
>> Well, see for me, I hate to say this,
but it's that one is always going to be
the violence number for me. Like that's
the that's the one. Where are we? Every
day when I wake up, that's the first
thing. Well, now it's in the afternoon
while I'm here, but every day when I
wake up at home, it's the first thing
that I look at look at. And then it's
also the vacant number, right? Like
where are we today? How many Has it gone
up? Has it gone down? We want to make
sure that we're hitting our goals,
right? Like are we at our 15% goal for
violence this year, right? Like that's
what I want to see continuously to do
that. But I have a lot of things that
that I follow. I'm I'm a dashboard
uh
a data person, so I have dashboards. We
have a housing dashboard, public safety
dashboard. We track a lot of things on
dashboards.
>> I hate to even ask this question because
it's so trite and so cliché to ask, but
I'm just going to ask it anyway.
AI, in terms of its actual application
within city government, are there things
yet at this point in what is it? Late
April 2026, where you could say we are
employing AI in some way that is making
something better, or is it in
experimental stage? Do you have a lot of
vendors promising magic if you adopt
their solution?
>> would never happen. No one from No one
promises that their thing is going to
solve the problems.
>> contemporary artificial intelligence
models within city government?
>> So for us, it it you know, we're our
departments using housing departments
using it. Like we even with vacant to
help identify the structures and whether
like if we need to look at condemnation
and those kind of things. And there'll
be other other things that we can push
to use it. But we just have to be smart
about it.
>> conversations here have I had
with people mayors trading tips and
stories and
>> Oh, that's that's that's the beauty of
it, right? That we're all Listen, we we
I'm I'm a part of the best Bloomberg
Harvard class. That's the fifth class.
So don't let any of the other mayors
tell you that they're not from my class,
they're not part of the best. But, like
we all talk to each other pretty much
every day, right? Like, there's a whole
bunch of mayors
>> Is there a group chat?
>> There's group chats with a S with a S.
So, we talk to mayors every day. I'm the
president of the African-American Mayors
Association. We talk to each other every
day. We're always sharing things. If
you're a mayor, one of the best things
that you have to be in order to be a
great mayor, you have to be a great
thief. You have to steal from mayors
across the country and steal ideas and
make them better for your that because
if you're not learning from your
counterparts, who are you learning from?
>> I have just one more question and it's
entirely out of personal interest, but
if I want to explore Baltimore outside
of the Greyhound bus station and the
casino that's next to it, where should I
go?
>> Well, it depends. What time of Now, I
have to ask question. What time of year
you're coming?
>> Let's say it's summer. That's when I'm
next going to visit my dad in Annapolis.
>> What are your What are your interests?
What are your interests?
>> Um culture, arts, parks, gardening,
animals, yes.
Food.
No. I didn't want to say everything
except sports, but that's pretty much
it.
>> I need to know. Those are the kind of
things I need to know. So, if you're
coming in the summer time, you love
food. So, you're coming to Baltimore, so
you can't come to Baltimore and not eat
crabs. So, would you prefer crabs or
crab cakes?
>> Oh, that's a really hard question.
I feel like crab cakes probably.
>> All right. So, if you're going to get
crab cakes, you have to go and get the
best crab cake in the world from Koco's
Pub. You'll never eat another crab cake
after having that one. I'll just start
start you there. But, since you're into
art and culture, you should then right
now up and through August, we actually
have at the Walters Art Art Gallery,
which is free to the public, we actually
have a a Dorian Fletcher exhibit that is
exhibit that has the jewelry and the
costumes
from uh Black Panther: Wakanda Forever
is on display in Baltimore at the museum
uh because we found out that uh some of
the art at our museum inspired her to do
her jewelry art. So, that's a great way
to spend to spend your time there. But,
if you happen to come
Memorial Day weekend, you can do that
and enjoy uh the Artscape Festival, our
free uh arts festival that is Memorial
Day weekend that has art vendors selling
art including at our Scape Art Fair,
which is really great. You have
musicians there. The Roots will be there
this summer. You have food galore,
everything galore. And it's there. The
art you have to pay for, but everything
else is there. Food uh you have to pay
for, but the music is free 99.
>> You've sold me. Um crab cakes and
costumes, I am there. Uh Mayor Brandon
Scott, thank you so much for coming on
All Thoughts. Really appreciate it.
>> me. Thank you.
>> So, Joe, that was obviously very
interesting. I never expected to
interview the mayor of Baltimore in
Madrid. Um but, you know, one of those
nice occasions that happens.
>> Life is interesting. No, I thought that
was a really interesting episode. I
mean, we could have gone for like an
hour just asking him to go off on The
Wire, obviously. But, I get that I
hadn't really thought about that that
this is the cultural depiction of a city
in a way that does not
the the the richness of the depictions
of New York City. Totally different.
Totally totally unfair. I also thought
it was like interesting this thought and
I sort of had it before, but it really
makes sense.
>> Yeah.
>> Crime has to be the number one thing.
And sometimes I think that there are
certain questions that economics itself
as a discipline is sort of ill-equipped
to deal
>> Yeah.
>> And look, you can have all the sort of
rights, zoning, and tax structures, and
capital structures in the world, but if
people don't want to live in the
vicinity of high crime rates, it's going
to mean nothing. But, that is going to
be sort of a limit to what you can do on
paper or with money or anything like
that.
>> Yeah, and I thought it was really
interesting to hear how I guess
developers / businesses are actually
thinking about it because like yes,
it's at the forefront of everyone's
mind, but it's kind of interesting to
hear maybe a a specific business will be
like,
"We're interested once the homicide rate
is below this particular number." I
guess you have to have like a numerical
target in your mind as well.
>> Yeah, that makes sense.
Everyone um should read the Peter Moskos
book. It's about he he spent a year
within the Baltimore Police Department.
It's a really good you know, it's this
cliche that we talk about in many
fields, which is that, you know, once
something becomes a
a measure, once you start targeting a
measure, it stops being useful, right?
So, maybe in theory at one point there
might have been some relationship
between the number of arrests that you
make and the size of the crime rate.
>> Yeah.
>> Suddenly then you're like, "Okay, let's
prioritize making arrests." And then be
once the measure becomes a target in its
own right, it completely falls apart.
And it's sort of intuitive, but he
really like walks through exactly how
and why that fails from a policing
perspective. It's really one of the more
interesting books that I've read.
>> Yeah, that was like a stunning figure,
this idea that the number of arrests has
gone down so much along with the
homicide rate. I had no idea like how
many arrests there actually were before.
That was crazy.
>> I think we should go to Baltimore soon.
No, seriously, it sounded like, you
know, he when he when he when he pitched
to you at the end, you know, started
thinking about the crab, the food, the
music, the art. I was like, "Yeah, we
should uh
I mean, you're I guess you're going to
be there regardless, but now I want to
take another Baltimore
>> I'll be at the bus station and then
moving onwards, but I think this time I
am going to I'm going to try to stay for
like a day or two. Have some crab cakes.
All right, shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> Okay, this has been another episode of
the All Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Alloway. You can follow me at Tracy
Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at The Stalwart. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Erman, Dash O
Bennett at Dash Bot, Kill Brooks at Kill
Brooks, Kevin Lozano at Kevin Lloyd
Lozano.
>> And for more Odd Lots content, you
should check out our daily newsletter.
That is at bloomberg.com/odd
lots.
>> And you can chat about all these topics
24/7 in our Discord,
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please leave a comment or like the
video or better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.
>> [music and singing]